[Music]
now to illustrate the usefulness of va
editor in editing some source codes
in languages such as c
i will fetch one of my old program codes
from another machine
and then i will show them to you how the
syntax highlighting etc would work
so the file is actually in my other
machine so i would bring that up using
the secure copy so you can see that i am
moving the files using the command line
environment so
secure
copy from the ip address which is next
to me from the folder called documents i
am getting
code 3d dot tar
and that file i want to bring it at the
current that is current directory
and it asked me for my password of the
particular machine i have done it so you
can see that i have now downloaded a
tar file called code 3d dot r so what is
this file type
so it's an archive file and i can unpar
it so i can open up all the files so car
minus xvf
code 3d dot tar
and it has created a directory in which
there are number of files
so i go to the directory
and
i want to now
view some of these text files using
editors so first i will show you with
the pico editor which you have seen the
main.c i want to open
so
nano
main.c
and you can see that the
file is visible with the different
colors for different
keywords of the c language
and you are able to move around within
the file
using the arrow keys itself
and you could also make some changes so
i can just
try to make a change here
which is like a comment
so i have just made a comment and
already it is getting
in a different color to indicate
the syntax
and
i can now save and come out so ctrl o to
save the file and ctrl x to come out so
you can use nano editor to edit your
source codes quite convenient and within
the terminal environment itself
now i want to show the same thing in a
va editor
so when you open
you can see that there is no menu on the
top etcetera it's a little bit more
convenient and it says that there is a
this file is actually dos format so here
at the bottom you see that it says dos
format which means that the file was
originally created in a windows system
and therefore at the end of every line
there is a character
which is like you know carriage written
which is why this calls a as a dos file
so let us view that character so i can
ask va editor in the binary mode so i
can now see what is the character it is
complaining of so you can see that there
is a control m at the end of every line
which is actually what makes it a dos
file so i want to remove that additional
character from the
file so i can do that by search and
replace so this is the power of va
editor i am illustrating to you so i
press escape to ensure that i am in the
command mode press colon
shift colon so that i am in the x mode
at the bottom you can see i'm in the x
mode and i want to remove it from every
line so percentage sign means everywhere
substitute and then what do i
use to capture this command so control v
and then control m would capture the
special character so ctrl v control m
okay it has captured the special
character and i want to replace with a
null so that there is a deletion of that
character and i want to do it everywhere
so i press a g
now you see that when i press enter what
happens that character has been removed
from the whole file
and now i can save the file and come out
and i open the file once more and it
does not complain that it is a dos file
because there is no carriage written at
the end of each line
so you have removed one character from
every of these lines in 216 lines in one
go so that is the power of a va editor
now let us say that we want to also
explore this further so
control f would scroll the page
downwards so
let me go to the first line
and let me also
set the numbers so you can see that i am
in the 27 the line at the bottom of my
screen so when i press ctrl f you see
that 27th line is at the top of the
screen and one whole screen has been
scrolled now i want to scroll only half
a screen so i could do that by using
ctrl d
okay so you can see that i am scrolling
only half of the screen control d would
be down half
control u will be up half up half okay
so you could scroll either full screens
or you could scroll half screens and you
can always go to a specific line so let
us say at 128th line there is an error
so i can press colon 128 and go exactly
to that line
and you can see that the
syntax highlighting is happening to show
you the matching brace so it is useful
for programmers to also identify the
loops that are closing properly
and you can actually move up and down
using the arrow keys and then you can
start making some changes to the text so
i want to make let us say this value not
0 and 1 so i can press r to replace the
character and the character i want to
replace is 1 so i press 1 and press
escape i am done ok now again i can move
around so you can see that we are able
to make
extremely precise editing into the file
but also
able to move around quite conveniently
in a visual manner so va editor that way
is quite convenient
i go to the last line okay and last line
now let us say let me look at some
variables so there is a
structure called converge
which has been used here so you can see
converge is
is the name of the structure
and i want to name that converge
structure to something else so i will go
and check where all that word comes so
slash
converge
and you see that i am able to press now
n
to check wherever it comes so i ensure
that
it is available only as part of the
structure and not in not as a part of
any function name and
look around and ensure that it is
occurring only as name of
the structure alone okay so once i
confirm then what i can do is that i can
go ahead and replace it so colon
percentage substitute converge to
something else name let us say i happen
to
rename it to capital
converge because that is what is
correctly given in the input file let us
say so i can apply this change
everywhere in the file and you see that
everywhere the converse has been changed
to capital c so we can do some variables
name changes in one go everywhere or you
can see 39 substitutions on 33 lines
have been affected with just one command
so that is the power of va editor which
i would say is available perhaps only
with emacs but any other editor would
not make it that easy okay and i could
also do u to undo the change
okay now uh we could also
see the power of it by
seeing that we are able to edit it in a
convenient manner
so i want to append something at the end
i press capital a so i go to the end of
the line and start appending so i have a
comment here
okay
then i go to the beginning of the line
pressing 0
you can replace one single character by
pressing r so i press r
the i will be changed to let us say
capital i and then escape okay so you
can change one character at a time you
could also change until you press escape
so i can use it by capital r so in the
command mode i press escape to ensure
that i am in the command mode and then
shift r which means that until i press
escape i will be replacing the
characters and i can do that by saying
that okay i
then c
o n so i can keep on replacing the
characters
okay and i press escape that means i am
done with the replacement so you can see
that the editing can happen by
replacement of characters without
disturbing the layout of the characters
in the file so for the input files which
are very specific with respect to the
positioning and formatting then very
precise editing can be done using va
editor
and you can go to the beginning
and use the
arrow keys to navigate and let us say i
want to replace this word i can press c
w to replace one single word cw
and then
i can press like that
okay and i can also
i can press a cw
and
i can press escape and done with the
editing so you can see that you can
change one word fully
and it will affect only that word
and leave the blank after that as a word
boundary so you can actually change one
word at a time which is a very precise
way of editing the source code now let
us say we want to edit a very large file
and that is again where va editor is
quite convenient so
we have some output of a command like d
m e s g so let us look at that
so dmesj if i type then the long output
that is shown okay this is all the error
messages and alerts that are given by
the system so i want to just capture
that into a file so i type
greater than dmsg dot text okay now
look at the file size so you can see
that it's a
quite a big file you know 270 kilobytes
so how many lines are there in that
wc minus l dm est text so you can see
that there are 3000 lines so i can go
ahead and load that in the text editor
and now i have got lot of lines to play
with so
i can press cap
control g to see the number of lines
colon f to see the file name
dollar to go to the last line 351
lines
and again one to go to the first line
and let us say now i want to delete
hundred lines
so i will press one zero zero followed
by dd so that exactly hundred lines are
deleted so i press one zero zero dd
okay hundred fewer lines
and i press g to see that there are 2951
lines so 100 lines have been deleted now
i can do that in a big way also so i
want to delete let us say 2800 lines so
2800 dd
so you can see 2800 lines have been
deleted and control g you can see there
are only 151 lines
and so you can actually
see that
the power of commands in va so if you so
if you prepend a number to it that
command will be run so many times and
therefore it is very powerful
in editing a large file
without the effort of actually scrolling
through every line
so we have got now 151 lines so i now
delete
another 100 lines
and then 20 lines
20 lines so now you can see that we have
got only
11 lines now
the window is shown here so there are
some tildes in the end so these are all
basically characters that are indicating
that the file content is over
and up to here only the file content is
the rest of is just
tilde to just show you that there is no
content from the file within the window
that has to be shown now let us say in
this file i want to replace the word
pcie port with hello so i can do that
now
colon
percentage substitute p c i e p o r t
and
i replace it with hello
so you can see that i have edited in one
go all of that okay now i want to also
use the
concept of regular expressions to
find something and then go on to change
something so i want to find out wherever
there are four zeros followed by a colon
and then two zeros i want to replace
that with something so that also i can
try with the combination of reg x and
this so i would go by saying that okay
there are four characters
after that there is a colon and there
are two characters so already the
highlighting is showing what is likely
matched okay now this i would like to
replace it with let us say
null okay
and you see that all those things have
been
modified exactly what we have intended
okay and i just undo so you can just
verify that wherever 0 0 0 0 colon 0 0
is there all that has been
nullified but you can also see that it
has done beyond that because here also
it would match okay so wherever it has
matched with the regular expression it
has gone ahead and done so
i will do it and show you that there is
one more coming up here because it has
matched with these also
okay so regular expression that way if
you understand well it would help you
understand where all the changes can
occur
now you could also do that by searching
so press press
forward slash dot dot dot colon dot dot
okay so wherever the pattern is there
that will match okay so that's the first
match this is the second match third
match fourth match fifth match sixth
match you can see that where all it gets
matched and therefore you know where all
it will actually go and do the change
and this is something that you can also
learn to
be alert by becoming more and more
familiar with the regular expressions
and if you want to remove whatever is in
the square brackets in the beginning
that also we could do now
okay so
so you know that square brackets have
special meaning in the regular
expression language so therefore we are
escaping that with a backslash and i
want to remove whatever is there in that
square brackets so
i just removed with the null and you see
that that entire part has been deleted
okay so you can do massive editing
by understanding the command line aspect
of va editor
on any file log file or whatever and do
these kind of operations
okay so now i will show you something
that is very cute which is
interesting for you
to understand how to use va editor to do
some manipulations of the text okay
so i go to the test.txt
and here i would
like to change the capital lines
okay i have made all of them smile now
let us say the first four words i want
to convert them to look like an email
address let us say okay so i could do
that
substitute
line and i want to change that to look
like
okay and you see that the entire text
has been modified to look like an email
address
so we can actually go ahead and do these
kind of manipulations to text how many
hour lines are there even if it is
running into hundreds and thousands of
lines the va editor will be able to do
those changes within few seconds
because the
commands are rather fast
and you can actually prepare your input
file for further processing using
various other commands so some commands
can be run within the text editor itself
to prepare the input file for some other
processing beyond the editor
now the third editor that we would like
to look at in the command line
environment is emacs which is also very
popular
and here
there is only one mode in which the
editor will work
and
every command is actually going to be
either a control plus a character or alt
plus a character so c hyphen is used to
mean that it is control plus that
character so c p means control plus p
c b means control plus b c f means
control plus f okay so you have commands
basically either control plus something
or meta key or alt key plus something so
in that way when you press the regular
keys you are basically doing the
inputting of the characters for your
text file
but when you are pressing controller alt
it means that you are going to do some
operations
running commands and moving around
etcetera so therefore there is only one
mode in which way
it is very different from va editor
which has three different modes in which
it is running
and here i am giving you some summary
which we could actually explore in a
moment and you could look at the
reference card from the gne website
for a quick summary of
various options in the emacs
and here are some major features that we
would like to look at
so first thing that we need to know when
we enter a
editor is to learn how to come out so as
soon as we enter if you want to look
around and then you want to come out
control x control
c would mean that you would come out of
the e max editor okay and if you happen
to make some changes and save it then
ctrl x and ctrl s
and if you want to just suspend the e
max editor but just come out to do
something else so control z would
actually help you to just come out
quickly to do some other command line
work that you may have on the shell
and the search and replace aspects are
also available in emacs you could also
copy paste text in emacs so in many ways
it is as powerful
as the ba editor
so let us try it out
to see how it looks like in the
terminal so when we type emacs
it would usually open a graphical user
interface because we are running it in
the gui mode but you can actually force
it to open only in the terminal by using
the minus nw option so i have the
source code so cd code 3d and i would
open one of the codes
main.c using the option minus
nw okay so then it is opening within the
terminal window itself now you can see
that you are able to move around using
the cursor keys
and you can start typing already because
there is only one mode you know so i
just go and then start typing okay
so that seems to be quite nice and you
can delete the characters using the
backspace
okay you can see that i am able to
delete now
okay and i can also type something here
okay and
okay so you could see that you are able
to edit okay quite comfortably and you
can go forward
okay
control down ctrl delete
ctrl d to delete the characters so when
you press ctrl p
then you are going
up one line
okay when you press ctrl b
you are moving left one line
then when you press meta that is alt key
then meta b
then you would go
left of the previous word
meta f
would go
right of the next word
then meta a would go to the beginning of
the line
and meta e would take you to the end of
meta v would
scroll the page by one screen
and the control v would actually
move the
page
forward by one screen
ctrl a go to the beginning of the line
ctrl e to the end of the line so meta is
for the words so i come here and show
you here
okay
alt
a
goes to the beginning of the text
alt e to the end of the text
but meta
control a would actually go to the
beginning of the
line itself but not the text so
it is also useful for
changing the text or go to the beginning
of the line to add some character
etcetera so the meta and alt meta which
is alt key and the control character are
both used for
composing the commands and there are
various commands like that so
some of the popularly used commands to
move around and delete text etc you may
want to have a look
you could always delete the text using
the backspace so you don't need to
actually have a
key for that okay and you can add a text
just by typing always
okay
so basic editing is something that you
don't have to worry at all you can right
away start editing whenever whenever you
are done with your editing you can you
can save your
work by pressing ctrl
x and then control s
okay so then it would write the file and
then you want to come out control x and
then control c so you come out of the
emax editor okay so like this you have
many features of emacs which we have
summarized so
try it out and see which one you like
either e max or va both the editors are
anyway available in
all the linux variants so once you learn
to use one of the two editors either vi
or emacs you can stick to it and become
expert at it with time the movie
the terminal
with tom hanks has a sentence on the
poster which says life is waiting so the
person wants to get out of the terminal
because life is waiting for that person
outside but for us programmers when we
get into the terminal is when the life
has started becoming more fun and with
more control so i hope you will
enjoy your stay inside the terminal
and find a lot of things to do there so
that you will actually like
to stay in the terminal
and keep doing your work and understand
the linux operating system
to a greater depth